---
title: Output Styles in Sass
tags: sass
template: /base.jade
category: snippet
---

Sass supports four different output styles:

* nested (default)
* expanded
* compact
* compressed

While the CSS rules generated by any of the four styles will behave identically, the output styles allow for various formatting options to be employed in different circumstances and for different audiences.

All of the samples below are generated by running this scss through `node-sass`:

```
/*! Copyright 2015 */

/*
    Button properties.
*/
.btn-a {
     background: #777777;
     border: 1px solid #ccc;

     &:hover {
          // Change button background on hover.
          background: #cecece;
     }
}
.btn-b {
     @extend .btn-a;
     background: #ffff00;
}
```

### nested

The default output style, nested produces CSS that is indented to show the logical hierarchy of the stylesheet. Rules that expand upon or descend from other rules are indented below those preceding rules, such that they visually appear to be nested. The intention is provide a visual structure that allows someone reading the CSS to quickly undertstand the basic organization of the style rules.

Our example looks like this using the `nested` output style:

```
/*! Copyright 2015 */
/*
    Button properties.
*/
.btn-a, .btn-b {
  background: #777777;
  border: 1px solid #ccc; }
  .btn-a:hover, .btn-b:hover {
    background: #cecece; }

.btn-b {
  background: #ffff00; }
```

### expanded

The expanded style produces a CSS stylesheet that's similar to how a human would write the CSS. Only properties are indented, and rules are each given their own line. This might be a bit more legible to users who aren't yet accustomed to seeing the nested style.

Our example looks like this using the `expanded` output style:

```
/*! Copyright 2015 */
/*
    Button properties.
*/
.btn-a, .btn-b {
  background: #777777;
  border: 1px solid #ccc;
}

.btn-a:hover, .btn-b:hover {
  background: #cecece;
}

.btn-b {
  background: #ffff00;
}
```

### compact

The compact output style produces a smaller, tighter CSS stylesheet than either nested or expanded. Each style rule is printed on its own line, beginning with the selector and followed by all of its properties. The properties are separated by some whitespace so they're still readable. The primary advantage of compact is the emphasis it places on the selectors.

Although compact does produce a smaller stylesheet than nested and expanded, it still doesn't produce as small of a stylesheet as compressed. For that reason compressed should still be chosen for production deployments.

Our example looks like this using the `compact` output style:

```
/*! Copyright 2015 */
/* Button properties. */
.btn-a, .btn-b { background: #777777; border: 1px solid #ccc; }

.btn-a:hover, .btn-b:hover { background: #cecece; }

.btn-b { background: #ffff00; }
```

### compressed

The compressed style produces the smallest resultant CSS stylesheet. The entire output is contained with a single line, and all unnecessary whitespace is removed. Also removed are all non-required comments, that is all comments that don't start with `/*!`.

Compressed output is not meant to be human-readable, but its minimized size makes it a perfect choice for production deployments.


Our example looks like this using the `compressed` output style:

```
/*! Copyright 2015 */.btn-a,.btn-b{background:#777777;border:1px solid #ccc}.btn-a:hover,.btn-b:hover{background:#cecece}.btn-b{background:#ffff00}
```
